Ansible Playbook (Video 1:06)

An Ansible playbook is a configuration file written in YAML format that outlines a blueprint of automation tasks to be executed across 
designated infrastructure networks. Instead of executing manual commands on thousands of individual target systems, developers use 
playbooks as step-by-step instruction manuals to automatically deploy applications, enforce security policies, or update infrastructure
uniformly.

Core Concepts

Playbook: The master configuration file containing one or more plays.

Play: Maps a specific group of host computers from your inventory to an ordered list of tasks.
Task: An individual action that invokes a specific automation tool (module).
Module: The actual software binary or code executed on the target host (e.g., installing a package).
Idempotency: The playbook can run multiple times safely, changing nothing if the target system is already in the desired state.

Structure of a Playbook

Here is a practical example of an ansible_setup.yml playbook designed to update systems and configure an Nginx web server:

---
- name: Configure Web Servers
  hosts: webservers
  become: true
  vars:
    web_port: 80

  tasks:
    - name: Ensure Nginx is at the latest version
      ansible.builtin.apt:
        name: nginx
        state: latest
        update_cache: true

    - name: Ensure Nginx service is running and enabled
      ansible.builtin.service:
        name: nginx
        state: started
        enabled: true

Essential Keywords Explained

name: A descriptive label used to document the play or individual task.
hosts: Refers to the targeted machines or groups defined in your inventory file.
become: Triggers privilege escalation, equivalent to executing commands using sudo.
vars: Declares a reusable set of variables locally within the play.

Execution and Management Commands

To work with playbooks from your control node terminal, rely on the official Ansible Command Line Tools:

Intent                          Terminal Command Syntax

Run a playbook                  ansible-playbook -i inventory.ini playbook.yml
Perform a syntax                checkansible-playbook playbook.yml --syntax-check
Dry-run simulation              ansible-playbook playbook.yml --check
View targeted hosts             ansible-playbook playbook.yml --list-hosts
